<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Relationship Examples</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    <h1>Relationship Examples</h1>
<p>Twistar is an <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-relational_mapping">Object Relational Mapper (ORM)</a>.  
It therefore defines ways of interacting with objects and other objects that have relationships with them.  The code
here is not necessarily great Twisted code; where typically you would expect to see <code>DeferredList</code>s and 
<code>inlineCallbacks</code> there are none to provide clarity to those new to Twisted.
</p>
<p>
More information on relationships can be found in the <code class="python">Relationship</code> class.
</p>
  <h2>Has One</h2>
  <p>Perhaps the simplest relationship is the <code>Has One</code> relationship.  In this example, we will
be using a <code class="python">User</code> object that <code>Has One</code> <code class="python">Avatar</code>
object.
  </p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class User(DBObject):
     HASONE = ['avatar']

class Avatar(DBObject):
     pass

Registry.register(User, Avatar)
</pre>
<p>
In this example, we specify that each user can have one avatar.  The database at this point should have two tables:
<ol>
  <li>A <code>users</code> table with at least a column <code>id</code>.</li>
  <li>A <code>avatars</code> table with at least two columns: <code>id</code> and <code>user_id</code>.</li>
</ol>
It is also necessary to register our classes with the registry before we can start utilizing relationships (this is
so the module can find and instantiate them when necessary).
</p>
<p>
For the <code>HASONE</code> class variable we can optionally give a dictionary that provides additional information:
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class User(DBObject):
     HASONE = [{'name': 'avatar', 'class_name': 'Avatar', foreign_key: 'user_id'}]

class Avatar(DBObject):
     pass

Registry.register(User, Avatar)
</pre>
<p>
There are additional options as well: see the <code class="python">Relationships</code> class
for more information.
</p>
<p>
At this point we can use the relationship and assign user's avatar:
</p>
<pre class="python">
def onPicSave(picture, user):
     user.picture.set(picture)

def onUserSave(user):
     Avatar(file="somewhere").save().addCallback(onPicSave, user)

User(first_name="Bob").save().addCallback(onUserSave)
</pre>
<p>We can then get it:</p>
<pre class="python">
def foundPicture(picture):
     print picture.file

def foundUser(user):
     user.picture.get().addCallback(foundPicture)

User.find(where=['first_name = ?', "Bob"], limit=1).addCallback(foundUser)
</pre>
  <h2>Has Many</h2>
<p>Another relationship is used when one object "has many" of another.  For instance, a <code>User</code>
may have many <code>Pictures</code>.
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class User(DBObject):
     HASMANY = ['pictures']

class Picture(DBObject):
     pass

Registry.register(User, Picture)
</pre>
<p>Again, the list assigned to <code>HASMANY</code> can have dictionaries in it just like <code>HASONE</code> that
contain additional configuration options.  For this relationship, the database should at this point should have two tables:
<ol>
  <li>A <code>users</code> table with at least a column <code>id</code>.</li>
  <li>A <code>pictures</code> table with at least two columns: <code>id</code> and <code>user_id</code>.</li>
</ol>
As in the previous example, we can get and set a user's pictures using a special property of user: 
<code>pictures</code>. 
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twisted.internet.defer import inlineCallbacks

@inlineCallbacks
def addPictures():
     # set some pics
     user = yield User(first_name="Bob").save()
     picone = yield Picture(file="somewhere").save()
     pictwo = yield Picture(file="elsewhere").save()
     pictures = [picone, pictwo]
     yield user.pictures.set(pictures)
     
     # now get them
     pictures = yield user.pictures.get()
     print pictures[0].file
     print pictures[1].file

addPictures()
</pre>
<p>Additionally, there is a <code>clear()</code> method that will clear all
objects in a given has many relationship.</p>

  <h2>Belongs To</h2>
<p>
A good example of the "belongs to" property is the reverse of the "has many":
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class User(DBObject):
     HASMANY = ['pictures']

class Picture(DBObject):
     BELONGSTO = ['user']

Registry.register(User, Picture)
</pre>
<p>
Assuming the DB structure is the same as in the "has many" example, you can now get and set the user that 
a particular picture belongs to (using <code class="python">get()</code> and <code class="python">set()</code>
methods on <code class="python">picture.user</code>).  Additionally, there is a <code>clear()</code> method that will clear all
objects in a given "belongs to" relationship.
</p>
  <h2>Has and Belongs To Many</h2>
<p>
In a "has and belongs to many" relationship two objects have a many to many relationship.  For instance, users and favorite colors.  
A user can have many favorite colors and a favorite color could belong to many users.  In this example, there should be three tables &mdash;
a <code>users</code> table, a <code>favorite_colors</code> table, and a <code>favorite_colors_users</code> table.  The last on the list 
is a special table that stores the relationships between the colors and users.  It has no primary key, and two columns: one for 
<code>user_id</code>s and one for <code>favorite_color_id</code>s.  The table's name by convention should be the combination of the other
two table names, joined with an underscore, and arranged alphabetically.  The classes would look like:
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class User(DBObject):
     HABTM = ['favorite_colors']

class FavoriteColor(DBObject):
     HABTM = ['users']

Registry.register(User, FavoriteColor)
</pre>
<p>
You can now get and set the users of favorite colors and the favorite colors of users
 (using <code class="python">get()</code> and <code class="python">set()</code>
methods).  Additionally, there is a <code>clear()</code> method that will clear all
objects in a given relationship.
</p>

<h2>Polymorphic Relationships</h2>
<p>
  With a polymorhpic relationship, a model can belong to more than one other model using a single relationship.  For instance, take the example
  where two models (say, <code class="python">Boy</code> and <code class="python">Girl</code>) both have many nicknames.  Each <code class="python">Nickname</code>
  can belong to either a <code class="python">Boy</code> or a <code class="python">Girl</code>.  In this example, the tables for boys and girls may have whatever 
attributes you would like; the nicknames table, though, needs two columns in addition to an id and a value column.  These columns are used to identify the id and
type of the other class.  In this case, they will be called <code>nicknameable_id</code> and <code>nicknameable_type</code>.
</p>
<p>
The classes look like this:
</p>
<pre class="python">
from twistar.dbobject import DBObject
from twistar.registry import Registry

class Boy(DBObject):
    HASMANY = [{'name': 'nicknames', 'as': 'nicknameable'}]

class Girl(DBObject):
    HASMANY = [{'name': 'nicknames', 'as': 'nicknameable'}]    

class Nickname(DBObject):
    BELONGSTO = [{'name': 'nicknameable', 'polymorphic': True}]

Registry.register(Boy, Girl, Nickname)
</pre>
<p>
The use is pretty simple, and follows the same form as you would expect with a traditional &quot;belongs to&quot; relationship.
</p>
<pre class="python">
def sayHi(nicknameable):
     print "Hello, my name is %s and I am a %s" % (nicknameable.name, nicknameable.__class__.__name__)

def getPerson(nickname):
     nickname.nicknameable.get().addCallback(sayHi)

def setNickname(nickname, boyOrGirl):
     boyOrGirl.nicknames.set([nickname]).addCallback(lambda _: getPerson(nickname))

def boySaved(boy):
     Nickname(value="Bob").save().addCallback(setNickname, boy)

def girlSaved(girl):
     Nickname(value="Susie").save().addCallback(setNickname, girl)

Boy(name="Robert").save().addCallback(boySaved)
Girl(name="Susan").save().addCallback(girlSaved)
</pre>
<p>
You can see that the nicknames for the boy are set via <code class="python">boy.nicknames.set</code>; they are fetched as you would expect via <code class="python">boy.nicknames.get</code> 
(with the same form for girls).  For each nickname, by calling <code class="python">nickname.nicknameable.get</code> you could end up with either a <code class="python">Boy</code> or a 
<code class="python">Girl</code>.
</p>

  </body>
</html>

